{"source": "https://sf.courts.ca.gov/self-help/divorce-separation-annulment", "title": "California Divorce, Separation, and Annulment", "content": "Ending a Marriage or Domestic Partnership In California, there are three main ways to end a marriage or domestic partnership: - Divorce - Legal Separation - Annulment Divorce A divorce (also called \"dissolution of marriage\" or \"dissolution of domestic partnership\") is a legal proceeding that ends your marriage and/or domestic partnership. After a divorce, you are single and can remarry or be in a domestic partnership again. You can ask the court to make orders on the following once you file your case: - Custody and Visitation - Child Support - Spousal/Partner Support - Property Division - Domestic Violence Restraining Order - Attorney's Fees Legal Separation A legal separation does not end your marriage and/or domestic partnership. You cannot remarry or enter into a domestic partnership with someone else at the end of a legal separation. However, you can still ask the court to make the same orders as in a divorce. You do not need to meet California's residency requirement to file for a legal separation. If you file for a legal separation, you may later be able to file an amended petition to ask the Court for a divorce after you meet the residency requirements. Annulment An annulment (or \"nullity of marriage\" and/or \"nullity of domestic partnership\") is when a court says your marriage and/or domestic partnership is not legally valid. It is difficult to prove and rarely granted. A marriage and/or domestic partnership that is incestuous or bigamous is never valid and therefore void. Other marriages and/or domestic partnerships are voidable based on: - Petitioner’s age at the time of marriage and/or domestic partnership - Prior existing marriage and/or domestic partnership - Unsound mind - Fraud - Force - Physical incapacity A filing fee will be charged to file a Petition for Dissolution of Marriage/Domestic Partnership/Legal Separation/Nullity. To find the current fee, please see our fee schedule. If you cannot afford the filing fee, you may complete an Application for Waiver of Fees. Frequently Asked Questions Things to Consider Before Filing Your Case Q: How can I end my marriage and/or domestic partnership? A: In California, there are three main ways to end a marriage and/or domestic partnership. - Divorce - Legal Separation - Annulment Q: Who can ask for a divorce, legal separation or annulment? A: Either party can file for a divorce, legal separation or annulment. You do not need your spouse or domestic partner’s consent or agreement to file. Q: What do I have to prove to get a legal separation or divorce? A: California is a \"no fault\" divorce state, you do not need to prove someone did something wrong. You just have to state that you cannot get along with the other party. Legally, this is called \"irreconcilable differences.\" Q: What is a divorce? A: A divorce is a legal proceeding that ends your marriage and/or domestic partnership. After a divorce, you are single and can remarry or be in a domestic partnership again. You can ask the court to make orders on the following once you file your case: - Custody and Visitation - Child Support - Spousal/Partner Support - Property Division - Domestic Violence Restraining Order - Attorney's Fees Q: What is legal separation? A: A legal separation does not end your marriage and/or domestic partnership. You cannot remarry or enter into a domestic partnership with someone else at the end of a legal separation. However, you can still ask the court to make the same orders as in a divorce. Q: What is an annulment A:An annulment (or \"nullity of marriage\" and/or \"nullity of domestic partnership\") is when a court says your marriage and/or domestic partnership is NOT legally valid.  Annulments are difficult to prove and rarely granted. For further information regarding annulments, see California Courts Self-Help Guide on Annulment Q: What are the requirements to file for a divorce in San Francisco? A: You or your spouse must physically live in San Francisco for at least the last three months, and in California for at least the last six months at the time of filing your case. Q: Are there residency requirements for filing a dissolution of a domestic partnership? A: You can file in San Francisco if you or your domestic partner live in San Francisco for at least the last three months, and in California for at least the last six months at the time of filing your case, regardless of where your domestic partnership was registered. For domestic partnerships registered in California, you can file here even if you currently do not reside in California. Q: Are there residency requirements for filing a dissolution of a same-sex marriage? A: You can file in San Francisco if you or your spouse live in San Francisco for at least the last three months, and in California for at least the last six months at the time of filing your case, regardless of where you were married. For same-sex couples who were married in San Francisco, you may be able to file your divorce in San Francisco even if you do not live here. However, to file in San Francisco, you must both live somewhere that does not recognize your marriage and will not dissolve your marriage. Q: We are married and are also registered domestic partners. Do we have to end both in separate court cases? A: No. You can end your marriage and domestic partnership in the same case. Just make sure on the Petition you check the boxes to request a dissolution of marriage and domestic partnership. Q: Are there residency requirements for filing a legal separation? A: You can file a legal separation in California if at least one party resides in California at the time of filing. Q: I filed for a legal separation and now I want to file for a divorce. What do I do? A: You can amend your legal separation to a divorce once either party meets the residency requirements to file for divorce. To amend your case from legal separation to a divorce, you will need to file an amended Petition to request a divorce. You will then need to serve the other party with the amended Petition and take additional steps to finish your case. Q: How long will a divorce take? A: It depends, but the soonest you can become single is 6 months and a day from the time the other party was served with your divorce papers. Keep in mind you are responsible to complete all the required steps to finish your case. The sooner you complete each step, the sooner you can finish your case. Q: Why would I file a legal separation instead of a divorce? A: Some common reasons are: - A couple wants to live apart but remain married. They want the court to make orders regarding division of assets and/or debts, child and spousal support, and parenting issues; - For religious reasons; - Due to their personal beliefs; - They do not yet meet the residency requirements to file for divorce in California, but they to want to start the process of separating and filing a court case; - For financial reasons (e.g., to keep a spouse or partner on the other’s health insurance plan, to keep certain benefits that require a couple to remain married, or certain tax benefits for married couples). Q: What else should I consider before filing? A: Filing for a divorce, legal separation or annulment is a big decision with potential consequences. The process can be complicated depending on your situation. Filing for divorce can affect an immigration or bankruptcy case, and can have certain tax implications. You may want to get some advice from an attorney before filing. You can contact the San Francisco Bar Association at (415)989-1616 to be referred to a family law attorney. Summary Dissolution Q: What is a summary dissolution? A: A summary dissolution is a simpler way to get divorced for married couples and/or registered domestic partners. You must meet certain requirements to file a joint summary dissolution. Q: What are the requirements for filing a summary dissolution? A: Couples who agree to a divorce can file a summary dissolution if they meet ALL the following requirements: - Have been married for less than 5 years (from the date you got married to the date you separated); - Have no children together (born or adopted) and you are not expecting a new child now; - Do not own any part of land or buildings; - Do not owe more than $7,000 for debts acquired since the date you got married (excluding car loans); - Have less than $53,000 worth of property acquired during the marriage. (excluding cars); - Do not have separate property worth more than $53,000 (excluding cars); - Agree that neither spouse will ever get spousal support; AND - Have signed an agreement that divides your property (including your cars) and debts. Q: We meet all the requirements for a summary dissolution. How do I file? Visit the California Courts Find Your Court Forms Webpage to get the forms you will need. 1. Both parties must first read through FL-810, Summary Dissolution Information Booklet; 2. Complete worksheets on pages 7, 9, and 11 in the booklet; 3. Complete form FL-150, Income and Expense Declaration. 4. Exchange with each other the worksheets, form FL-150, and your tax returns for the last two years; 5. Complete form FL-800, Joint Petition for Summary Dissolution and form FL-825, Judgment of Dissolution and Notice of Entry of Judgment; 6. Make 2 additional copies of both forms; 7. Turn in your original and 2 copies of both forms along with a self-addressed stamped envelope for each party to Room 402 at the court; Please visit the Unified Family Court’s webpage for current hours 8. Pay the filing fee or apply for a fee waiver (both parties must qualify for a fee waiver in order for the fee to be waived); Please visit the court’s webpage for current filing fees 9. You will receive your judgment paperwork in the mail after six months. Q: What if I want to stop or cancel a summary dissolution? A: You cannot cancel or stop the divorce once a judgment is entered. However, if you decide to cancel or stop the divorce before you get a judgment, you must do the following: - Complete and file form FL-830 Notice of Revocation of Petition for Summary Dissolution in Room 402; - You must send a copy of form FL-830 to the other party by mail to his or her last known address. - You do not need the other party’s signature to revoke your summary dissolution. If the effective date of the judgment has not yet occurred, the clerk will notify you that the notice of revocation has been filed by completing the certificate on the form. Once the clerk completes the certificate, your summary dissolution case has ended. You are still married and/or domestic partners. You will have to file a new case if you want to proceed with a divorce."}